docs: basic tutorials (#2495)
sopel-irc/sopel: docs/source/tutorials/playing-command.rst

=========================
Playing with your command
=========================

> Now that you have started :doc:`first-plugin`, maybe you want to write a more

Reviewer: We should consider that links to `:doc:` refs might look better with custom titles, at least to avoid the uppercase first letter that flows weirdly in the middle of a sentence.

interesting command than the basic ``.hello`` one. Not that there is anything
wrong with that command! The emoticons plugin is composed of commands like this
one::

    @plugin.command('shrug')
    @plugin.action_command('shrugs')
    def shrug(bot, trigger):
        bot.say('¯\\_(ツ)_/¯')

> Which is one of the maintainers' favorite command to use. However, let's see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Which is one of the maintainers' favorite commands to use. However, let's see
```

> if we can do a bit more complex than that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if we can do something a bit more complex than that.
```

Greeting a user by their name
=============================

> Have you noticed that a :func:`plugin_callable` takes two arguments? The first

Reviewer: I'd xref this to <tt>:ref:`plugin-anatomy-callables`</tt> to 1) avoid the monospace format and 2) render as a friendly term instead of what looks like a function name.

one is the ``bot``, i.e. an instance of Sopel (wrapped for your convenience)
that you can use to :doc:`/plugin/bot`.

In the previous tutorial, we used ``bot.reply``, which is convenient but not
always what you want. Maybe you want the bot to say this::

    <YourNick> .hello
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, have a nice day!

For that, you need the second argument: the ``trigger``. It is an object with
all the information you need about the message that triggered the callable,
such as the message itself, the channel, the type of message, etc. and what we
need for now is the :attr:`trigger.nick <sopel.trigger.Trigger.nick>`
attribute::

    from sopel import plugin

    @plugin.command('hello')
    def hello(bot, trigger):
        """Say Hello <user>, have a nice day!"""
        bot.say(f'Hello {trigger.nick}, have a nice day!')

.. seealso::

    You can learn much more about the :class:`trigger <sopel.trigger.Trigger>`
    object by reading its documentation.

Command with arguments
======================

> The trigger object can do much more for you: if a user add arguments to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trigger object can do much more for you: if a user adds arguments to the
```

> command, like this: ``.hello morning``, you can detect and use that argument::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
command, like ``.hello morning``, you can detect and use that argument::
```

This is for flow. Colon followed by comma is a bit odd.

(Would be nice if it also puts `.hello morning` on the same line, but I doubt deleting `this: ` will free up enough space in Furo.)

    from sopel import plugin

    @plugin.command('hello')
    def hello(bot, trigger):
        """Say Hello <user>, have a nice day!"""
        # groups 3 to 6 are the first, second, third, and fourth command arg
        when = trigger.group(3)
        # select a different greeting depending on when
        greeting = {
            'morning': 'and good morning!',
            'noon': 'are you having lunch?',
            'night': 'I hope it was a good day!',
            'evening': 'good evening to you!'
        }.get(when, 'have a nice day!')  # default to "nice day"
        # say hello
        bot.say(f'Hello {trigger.nick}, {greeting}')

Now the command will be able to react a bit more to your user::

    <YourNick> .hello morning
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, and good morning!
    <YourNick> .hello noon
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, are you having lunch?

.. seealso::

    You can learn much more about the :class:`~sopel.plugin.command` decorator
    by reading its documentation.

And... action!
==============

> Some users say ``.hello`` out loud, and other will say it with an action. How

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some users say ``.hello`` out loud, and others will say it with an action. How
```

do you react to these? Let's go back to our initial example of the ``shrug``
command: it uses a second decorator, ``action_command('shrugs')``, with a
different name. How does that work?

Sopel knows how to register the same plugin callable for different types of
trigger, so both ``.shrug`` and ``/me shrugs`` work. For example, you could do

> that for your hello plugin::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this for your hello plugin::
```

    @plugin.command('hello')
    @plugin.action_command('hi')
    def hello(bot, trigger):
        ...

And so, in chat, you will see that::

    <YourNick> .hello
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, have a nice day!

>     *YourNick hi*

Reviewer: Is this the action format for any actual clients? Usually I see something like this:

```suggestion
    * YourNick hi
```

    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, have a nice day!

> Summing It Up

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Summing it up
```

Consistency, schmistency.

=============

In this tutorial, we talked briefly about ``bot.say()`` and ``bot.reply()``,

> and there are more ways to :doc:`interact with the bot </plugin/bot>`.

Reviewer: Yep, this is the link style I think all the `:doc:` refs should use.

But also,

```suggestion
and explored a few more ways to :doc:`interact with the bot </plugin/bot>`.
```

=========================
Playing with your command
=========================

Now that you have started :doc:`your first plugin <first-plugin>`, maybe you
want to write a more interesting command than the basic ``.hello`` one. Not
that there is anything wrong with that command! The emoticons plugin is
composed of commands like this one::

    @plugin.command('shrug')
    @plugin.action_command('shrugs')
    def shrug(bot, trigger):
        bot.say('¯\\_(ツ)_/¯')

Which is one of the maintainers' favorite commands to use. However, let's see
if we can do something a bit more *complex* than that.

Greeting a user by their name
=============================

Have you noticed that a :ref:`plugin callable <Plugin callables>` takes **two

> arguments?** The first one is the ``bot``, i.e. an instance of Sopel (wrapped
> for your convenience) that you can use to

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's worth mentioning the wrapper implementation detail here, the newbie reader doesn't really need to know about it. I think the `i.e.` can be dropped as well, although I _am_ fond of literary abbreviations (cf. half of what I say on IRC)

```suggestion
arguments?** The first one is the ``bot``, an instance of Sopel that you can
use to
```

Reviewer: Also we're on track to eliminate the wrapper soon enough, anyway (see #2460).

@SnoopJ's suggestion leaves room for the `:doc:` xref below to be moved onto this line, I'm 98% sure (on mobile rn).

Author: Hm... yeah, that makes sense to me.

:doc:`interact with the bot </plugin/bot>`.

> In the previous tutorial, we used ``bot.reply``, which is convenient but not
> always what you want. Maybe you want the bot to say this::

Reviewer 2: Nit: elaborate on what `convenient` is getting at here, the reader may not be familiar enough with what it does

```suggestion
In the previous tutorial, we used ``bot.reply``, which is convenient when             
responding directly to a user, but not always what you want. Maybe you want the       
bot to say something more complex::
```

Reviewer: I'd say "can be convenient", even, instead of the blanket "is".

    <YourNick> .hello
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, have a nice day!

For that, you need **the second argument**: the ``trigger``. It is an object
with all the information you need about the message that triggered the
callable, such as the **message** itself, the **channel**, the type of message,
etc. and what we need for now is the
:attr:`trigger.nick <sopel.trigger.Trigger.nick>` attribute::

    from sopel import plugin

    @plugin.command('hello')
    def hello(bot, trigger):
        """Say Hello <user>, have a nice day!"""
        bot.say(f'Hello {trigger.nick}, have a nice day!')

.. important::

    If you want to test this with your bot, and your bot is already running,

>     you need to restart the bot so it will load the new version of your plugin.

Reviewer 2: Nit: you don't _need_ to, but we don't _have_ to let them know there's any other way to do it :stuck_out_tongue_winking_eye: 

```suggestion
    restart the bot so it will load the new version of your plugin.
```

Reviewer: Counter-proposal: Downgrade to "you should" rather than completely removing the prescription.

```suggestion
    you should restart the bot so it will load the new version of your plugin.
```

Author: I prefer the more direct approach to avoid a "technical" lie for the greater good.

.. seealso::

    You can learn much more about the :class:`trigger <sopel.trigger.Trigger>`
    object by reading its documentation.

Command with arguments
======================

The trigger object can do much more for you: if a user adds arguments to the
command, like ``.hello morning``, you can detect and use that argument::

    from sopel import plugin

    @plugin.command('hello')
    def hello(bot, trigger):
        """Say Hello <user>, have a nice day!"""

>         # groups 3 to 6 are the first, second, third, and fourth command arg
>         when = trigger.group(3)

Reviewer 2: I think some readers will look at this and think _"huh, what about groups 1 and 2?!"_ so it's probably worth mentioning them even though this example doesn't use them.

An example that would use group 2 could be something like:

```
<YourNick> .shout Hello, is this thing on?
<Sopel> HELLO, IS THIS THING ON?
```

but I think that additional comments will suffice for the careful reader.

```suggestion
        # group 1 is the name of the command that was triggered
        # group 2 is the entire rest of the message
        # groups 3 to 6 are the first, second, third, and fourth command arg
        when = trigger.group(3)
```

Author: I went back and forth on that one. Ultimately, it is way too confusing without the mention of what group 1 and 2 are doing.

Author: (and no, I'm not happy about it... but that's better that way)

        greeting = {
            'morning': 'and good morning!',
            'noon': 'are you having lunch?',
            'night': 'I hope it was a good day!',
            'evening': 'good evening to you!'
        }.get(when, 'have a nice day!')  # default to "nice day"
        # say hello
        bot.say(f'Hello {trigger.nick}, {greeting}')

Now the command will be able to react a bit more to your user::

    <YourNick> .hello morning
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, and good morning!
    <YourNick> .hello noon
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, are you having lunch?

How does that work? Well, the short version is that Sopel uses regex
(`Regular Expression`__) to match a message to a plugin callable, and the
``trigger`` object exposes the match result.

.. seealso::

    You can learn much more about the :class:`~sopel.plugin.command` decorator
    by reading its documentation.

.. note::

    In the case of a command, the regex is entirely managed by Sopel itself,
    while the generic :func:`@plugin.rule <sopel.plugin.rule>` decorator
    allow you to define your own regex.

.. __: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression

And... action!
==============

> Some users say ``.hello`` out loud, and others will say it with an action. How
> do you react to these? Let's go back to our initial example of the ``shrug``
> command: it uses a second decorator, ``action_command('shrugs')``, with a
> different name. How does that work?

Reviewer 2: Nit: this command was alluded to, but calling it `our initial example` seems a little bit off to me.

```suggestion
Some users say ``.hello`` out loud, and others will say it with an action. How
do you react to these? Let's go back to the example of the ``shrug`` command:
it uses a second decorator, ``action_command('shrugs')``, with a different
name. How does that work?
```

Author: I can see how someone could be confused, so better be safe here. Good call!

Playing with your command
=========================

Now that you have started :doc:`your first plugin <first-plugin>`, maybe you
want to write a more interesting command than the basic ``.hello`` one. Not
that there is anything wrong with that command! The emoticons plugin is
composed of commands like this one::

    @plugin.command('shrug')
    @plugin.action_command('shrugs')
    def shrug(bot, trigger):
        bot.say('¯\\_(ツ)_/¯')

Which is one of the maintainers' favorite commands to use. However, let's see
if we can do something a bit more *complex* than that.

Greeting a user by their name
=============================

Have you noticed that a :ref:`plugin callable <Plugin callables>` takes **two
arguments?** The first one is the ``bot``, i.e. an instance of Sopel (wrapped
for your convenience) that you can use to
:doc:`interact with the bot </plugin/bot>`.

In the previous tutorial, we used ``bot.reply``, which is convenient but not
always what you want. Maybe you want the bot to say this::

    <YourNick> .hello
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, have a nice day!

For that, you need **the second argument**: the ``trigger``. It is an object

> with all the information you need about the message that triggered the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with all the information you need about the message that triggered your
```

Not that the previous wording was _wrong_, but in the context of a tutorial I think "your" makes more sense than "the".

Reviewer 2: Adding on to @dgw's suggestion, I think it makes sense to state more directly that the `trigger` holds information about the message, and the rest of the example speaks for the words this edit omits.

```suggestion
with information about the message that triggered your
```

Author: This is tough to decide, but ultimately I prefer a more direct approach too.

callable, such as the **message** itself, the **channel**, the type of message,

> etc. and what we need for now is the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
etc.—and what we need for now is the
```

Getting fancy with that punctuation! (At least, I _hope_ Sphinx can handle this without some kind of escape sequence. It's just Unicode.)

Author: Let's get FANCY.
:tophat:
:monocle_face:

    <YourNick> .hello noon
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, are you having lunch?

How does that work? Well, the short version is that Sopel uses regex

> (`Regular Expression`__) to match a message to a plugin callable, and the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(`REGular EXpressions`__) to match a message to a plugin callable, and the
```

If you can bold-face (**Reg**ular **Ex**pressions) or otherwise emphasize the relevant parts of each word within the link markup, feel free to do that instead; I just don't trust my reST skills enough to suggest that blind. 😁

Author: Good call! I'll see what I can do with the **boldening**.

``trigger`` object exposes the match result.

.. seealso::

    You can learn much more about the :class:`~sopel.plugin.command` decorator
    by reading its documentation.

.. note::

    In the case of a command, the regex is entirely managed by Sopel itself,
    while the generic :func:`@plugin.rule <sopel.plugin.rule>` decorator

>     allow you to define your own regex.

Author: It's a note in a tutorial: don't worry, it doesn't have to be exhaustive! It is my intent to show only a fraction of what is possible with Sopel here, as to not overload the reader with too many things at once. Take it as a hint, a drop of knowledge put here to open the door and nothing more.

>     allow you to define your own regex.

Author: Re-thinking about this: I, too, am not happy about how a plugin author can discover all the possible decorators, especially not happy about how to learn to use one or the other. This is definitively something to think about more for a future PR!

.. __: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Regular_expression

And... action!
==============

Some users say ``.hello`` out loud, and others will say it with an action. How
do you react to these? Let's go back to our initial example of the ``shrug``
command: it uses a second decorator, ``action_command('shrugs')``, with a
different name. How does that work?

Sopel knows how to register the same plugin callable for different types of
trigger, so both ``.shrug`` and ``/me shrugs`` work. For example, you could do
this for your hello plugin::

    @plugin.command('hello')

>     @plugin.action_command('hi')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    @plugin.action_command('says hi')
```

Don't see any reason this wouldn't work, and it's a better demonstration of how people generally define action commands (i.e. as _actions_ that sound like natural language).

Author: Hm... what about this instead?

```suggestion
    @plugin.action_command('waves')
```

    <YourNick> .hello
    <Sopel> Hello YourNick, have a nice day!

>     * YourNick hi

Author: This is how IRCCloud displays the result of a `/me` command:

![image](https://github.com/sopel-irc/sopel/assets/3259552/b02abef7-0b63-46c8-9a57-34141d6a2230)

It doesn't add "says" or anything, because in my experience it is supposed to be a user's action, and not a user talking.

>     * YourNick hi

Author: ```suggestion
    * YourNick waves
```
